---
title: 'Redefining Speed: all four running!'
date: 2025-08-22
excerpt: ""
permalink: /posts/2025/08/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - biology
---

Could the fastest runner of the future be someone sprinting on all fours? Not too fast: what is all fours? In this period of Olympics game, one sport is evolving, fast. <br>

All fours, in a running context, mean running on both feet and arms, or quadrupedal running. Yes, this is the way that run most of the mammals on Earth, from mouses to leopards. Unimaginable for Humans, this technique shows a growing relevance in sport science. Why? A study claims that by 2050, this technique will not only be present at the Olympic Games next to the 100m, but be the better one. <br>

It is 320 millions years ago, in the late Paleozoic, that mammals appear from reptilian ancestors. To overcome death on land, they had to adapt their walk, developing a more stable and efficient way of locomotion. Compared to bipedalism, quadrupedalism offers a greater balance, especially on uneven lands. For large mammal, quadrupedalism allows redistributing the weight, for smaller ones, it allows a diversity of movements from walking, running or digging a hole in the ground. Those were crucial capacities to either run away or run from others. Overtime, quadrupeds adapt and develop specializations, especially skeletal: we observe the emergence of flexible spine, elongated limbs and strong shoulders; and muscular: allowing endurance, efficient propulsion and maneuverability. <br>

Around 6 to 7 millions years ago, climate changes on Earth are happenings, cause a drastic drop of temperatures. During the Miocene period, the tropical forests are slowing giving up to savannas, especially in East Africa. This new configuration offered challenges to a mammal known as hominins. In the dawn of humanity, the switch from quadrupedalism to bipedalism allowed several advantages in the quest of surviving. Seeing over tall grasses, locate distant water and potential predators look harmless, but are the keys between life and death. This switch was not instantaneous but more gradual, joined by anatomical changes.

## References

- [All four running - paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4928019/)
- [Quadrupedalism — Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quadrupedalism)